## Prequel

### Operator Associativity

Consider the expression `a ~ b ~ c`.

- Left associativity: `(a ~ b) ~ c`
- Right associativity: `a ~ (b ~ c)`s

# Chapter 1

> A calculus is a method of calculation or reasoning; the lambda calculus is one process for formalizing a method. Like Turing machines, the lambda calculus formalizes the concept of effective computability, thus determining which problems, or classes of problems, can be solved.

## 3 basic components of lambda calculus

1. expressions,
2. variables,
3. abstractions

Expression is a superset of the 3. It can be a variable name, an abstractions or a combination.

An abstraction is a function. It is a lambda term that has a head (a lambda) and a body and is applied to an argument (only 1 argument). It is called an abstraction because it is a generalization/abstraction from a concrete jinstance of a problem.

In `λx.x`

- **λx.** is the head
- The first `x` is the single binding variable
- The last `x` is the body
- the `.` separates the parameters of the lambda from the function body.

The purpose of the head of the function is to tell us which variables
to replace when we apply a function, that is, to bind the variables.

## Free & Bound Variables

- A _bound_ variable is one that appears in the head and body.
- A _free_ variable is one that appears in the body but not the head.

## Alpha equivalence

λx.x is the same as λa.a but not the same as λd.f

> Alpha equivalence does not apply to free variables. `λx.xz` & `λx.xy` are not equivalent because `z` & `x` may not be the same thing.

## Beta reduction

Beta reduction is the process of

- applying a lambda term to an argument
- replacing the bound variables with the value of the argument
- and eliminating the head.

Eliminating the head tells you the function has been applied.

When you apply a function to an argument you can eliminate the head of the abstraction since its only purpose is to bind a variable.

Once there are no more heads left to evaluate or no more arguments to apply to them, beta reduction is done.

> **Church-Rosser property**, which states that the normal form obtained is independent of the order of evaluation of subterms.
> -- Introduction to Lambda Calculus Barendregt & Barendsen

### Associativity

Applications in the lambda calculus are _left associative_. Therefore

`(λx.x)(λy.y)z`

can be writtne as

`((λx.x)(λy.y))z`

This would reduce as

```
((λx.x)(λy.y))z
   [x := (λy.y)]
         (λy.y)z
          [y := z]
                 z
```

### Binding with a free variable

```
(λx.xy)z
  [x := z]
    zy
```

### Multiple arguments

`λxy.xy` is shorthand for `λx.(λy.xy)`

In an example:

```haskell
  (λxy.xy) 1 2
=
  (λx.(λy.xy)) 1 2
= [x := 1]
  (λy.1y) 2
= [y := 2]
  1 2

-- the answer is 1 2, not 12
```

Reduce `(λx.λy.λz.xz(yz)) (λm.λn.m) (λp.p)`

This one is tricky. The trick is in step (d): `λn.z((λp.p)z)` results in nothing because when `λn` is applied to `((λp.p)z)`, `((λp.p)z)` is tossed-out because the `n` in `λn` is not bound to any variable (there is no variable `n`).
The free variable `z` remains and you get `λz.z`.

```

a. Start with:
(λx.λy.λz.xz(yz)) (λm.λn.m) (λp.p)

b. Apply the λx to the first argument (λm.λn.m):
(λy.λz.(λm.λn.m)(z)(yz)) (λp.p)

c. Apply λy to (λp.p)
(λz.(λm.λn.m)(z)((λp.p)z))

d. Apply λm to (z)
(λz.(λn.z)((λp.p)z))

e. Apply λn to ((λp.p)z)
(λz.(.z)

f. Remove parens
λz.z
```

Notes:

- You always work on the left most λ that can be reduced

## 1.7 Evaluation is simplification

- Evaluation is a form of simplification.
- There are multiple normal forms in lambda calculus but we are using _beta normal form_, which corresponds to a fully evaluated expression, or in programming, a fully executed program.

### Application vs Evaluation

'2000 / 1000' is fully applied but hasent been evaluated yet.

> As I understand it, the variables in the λ expression have been replace with 2000 & 1000 so it is applied. When evaluated you get 2.

### Normal Form

- The normal form of 2000 / 1000 is 2.
- The normal form of (10 + 2) \* 100/2 is 600.

## 1.8 Combinators

A _combinator_ is a lambda term with no free variables. Combinators serve only to combine the arguments they are given. that means, **every term in the body occurs in the head**. They cannot introduce any new values.

## 1.9 Divergence

_Divergence_ means the reduction process never terminates.

Example

(λx.xx)(λx.xx)
reduces to ... remove the head and replace both `x` with (λx.xx) you are back where you started.
(λx.xx)(λx.xx)

## 1.10 Summary

In Haskell, the semantics of the core language are the same as the lambda calculus. That is, the meaning of Haskell programs is centered around evaluating expressions rather than executing instructions, although Haskell has a way to execute instructions, too.
