# Chapter 4

- _Types_ are how we group a set of values that share something in common.

- _Data declarations_ are how _datatypes_ are defined.

- The _type constuctor_ is the name if the type and must be capitalized.

- _Data constructors_ are the values that sho up in your code at the term level instead of the type level.

- _Term level_ means the values as they appear in your code or that your code evaluates to.

```haskell
data Bool = False | True
      [1]    [2] [3] [4]
```

1. Type constructor for datatype Bool
2. Data constructor for the value False.
3. Pipe | indicates a sum type or logical disjunction: “or.” So, a Bool value is True or False.
4. Data constructor for the value True.

- The whole thing is called a **data declaration**.

## 4.4 Numeric types

> All number types have instances of the type class `Num`

### Integral (p. 91)

Integral numbers These are whole numbers, positive and negative.

1. _Int_:

- fixed-precision integer (i.e., limited to a range with min and max)

2. _Integer_:

- arbitrarily large (or small) numbers.

> Most programs should use Integer not Int.

3. _Word_:

- fixed-precision integer. Unlike Int, the
- smallest or lowest possible value expressible is zero.

### Fractional

- _Fractional_ values include the following four types:

1. _Float_

- single-precision floating point
- **Generally, floating point numbers should not be used at all in business applications**.

2. _Double_

- Double-precision floating point number type.

3. _Rational_

- a fractional number
- represents a ratio of two integers.
- E.g., The value 1 / 2 :: Rational will be a value carrying two Integer values, the numerator 1 and the denominator 2, and represents a ratio of 1 to 2. Rational is arbitrarily precise but not as eﬃcient as Scientific.

4. _Fixed_

- fixed-point (i.e., precision)
- Refers to the number of digits after the decimal place.

5. _Scientific_:

- space eﬃcient
- almost-arbitrary precision
- represented using scientiﬁc notation.
- stores the coeﬃcient as an Integer
- stores the exponent as an Int.
- Using Int is not arbitrarily large there is a limit to the size of scientific numbers.

> Scientific is not in Prelude. You get it from a library.

## Finding the boundry of number types

```haskell
Prelude> minBound :: Int8 -- -128
Prelude> maxBound :: Int8 -- 127
```

> In my version of Prelude `Int8` is not in scope and it suggest using `Int`. Integer doesn't work either.

> `> maxBount :: Int` gives the value 9,223,372,036,854,775,807

## 4.11 Names & variables

Haskell has sevel categories of entities that have names

1. functions
2. term-level variables
3. data constructors
4. type variables
5. type constuctors
6. type classes
7. modules
