# Chapter 5 - Types

## What is a "concrete type"?

This is concrete:

```haskell
> :t "julie"
-- "julie" :: [Char]
```

This is also concrete:

```haskell
> x = 13 :: Integer
> :t x
-- x :: Integer
```

This is not concrete. It is "type calss information". The complier doesn't know which specific type yet.

```haskell
> :t 13
-- 13 :: Num a => a
```

## Understanding the function type (p. 123)

### `->`

- `->` is the type constructor for functions in Haskell.
- It is a type constructor like Bool but it takes arguments and **has no data constructors**.

```haskell
> :i (->)
data (->) a b
```

The `a` & `b` means that a function must have two arguments. One is an input and one is the reault.

```haskell
fst :: (a, b)    ->    a
         [1]     [2]   [3]
```

1. The first parameter of fst has the type (a, b). Note that the tuple type itself (,) takes two arguments, a and b.
2. The function type, (->), has two parameters. One is (a, b), and one is the result a.
3. The result of the function, which has type a. It’s the same a that was in the tuple (a, b).

- addition takes one numeric argument,
- adds it to a 2nd numeric argument of the same type,
- and returns a numeric value of the same type as a result

### `=>` & `->`

I'm still not sure the difference between `->` & `=>` but it appears that

- `->` is the type constructor
- `=>` is the type class arrow
- Each arrow (`->` is show but `=>` not explicitly excluded) in a type signature represents on argument and one result with the final type being the final result

## Type class-constrained type variables (p. 125)

```haskell
(Num a, Num b) => a -> b -> b
```

`a` & `b` both have `Num`

```haskell
(Ord a, Num a) => a -> a -> Ordering
```

`a` both must have `Ord` & `Num`.

> "have". Data constructors "have instances of type classes".

## `map` is a function that takes a function (p. 130)

```haskell
map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
```

which associates to

```haskell
map :: (a -> b) -> ([a] -> [b])
```

I originally saw (a -> b) as tro params, but it really means that map takes a function that takes an `a` and returns a `b`.

## Partial application (p. 131)

The ability to apply only some of a functions's arguments is called partial application. This allows you to create new functions from existing functions such as:

```haskell
addStuff a b = a + b + 5

addTen = addStuff 5
```

`addStuff` takes two parameters. `addTen` suplies another parameter so it becomes a function that takes one parameter.

## Manual currying and uncurrying

Uncurry the `+` function starts as

```Haskell
 Num a => a -> a -> a
```

to become

```Haskell
Num a => (a, a) -> a
```

> There are more complex examples here but not explained much. I don't fully get it.

## Sectioning

The term sectioning specifically refers to the partial application of infix operators, which has a special syntax that allows you to choose whether you’re partially applying the operator to the first or the second argument:

- `2^` is using the `^` operatory and applying 2 to the 1st argument
- `^2` is using the `^` operatory and applying 2 to the 2nd argument

- It doesn't make any difference with communicative functions.
- You can also use it with with prefix functions if you use backticks to make them infix. E.g., ` c = (`elem` [1..10])`.

Main> :t kessel "ca" 1
kessel "ca" 1 :: [Char]
Main> :t kessel 1 2
kessel 1 2 :: (Ord a, Num a) => a
Main>

## 5.5 Polymorphism

Type signatures may have 3 kinds of types:

1. concrete: is what it is
2. constrained polymorphism: has type constraints
3. parametric polymorphism: refers to fully polymorphic (unconstrained by a type class) parameters. (Seems to me that this is also 'type determined by the type of its parameters'.)

Parametrically polymorphic:

```Haskell
id :: a -> a
```

> A type variable represents a set of possible types

In terms of function (functionality?), `id :: a -> a` has more possible types than . However, `Num a => a -> a` has a set of methods attached to it whereas `id :: a -> a` does not.

To say it another way: If a variable can be anything then there is little that can be doe to it because it has not specific methods.
